PLANNER-2713 Score DRL deprecation blog (#505)
kiegroup/optaplanner-website: optaplanner-website-root/content/blog/2022/05/26/optaplanner-deprecates-score-drl.adoc

= OptaPlanner deprecates score DRL
triceo

> 2022-03-07

Reviewer: Please don't forget to update the date before merging the PR.

:page-interpolate: true
:jbake-type: post
:jbake-tags: constraint, constraint streams, drl, deprecation

> Long story short: The time to switch to https://www.optaplanner.org/docs/optaplanner/latest/constraint-streams/constraint-streams.html[Constraint Streams] is now.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TLDR: The time to switch from scoreDRL to https://www.optaplanner.org/docs/optaplanner/latest/constraint-streams/constraint-streams.html[Constraint Streams] is now.
```

Here's the https://www.optaplanner.org/learn/drl-to-constraint-streams-migration.html[score DRL migration guide].
Score DRL is not going away in OptaPlanner 8.

== The rise of Constraint Streams

As I was starting with OptaPlanner more than a decade ago, score DRL was there, promising easy and fast score calculation.
It wasn't as fast as the Incremental Java calculator, but it also wasn't as hard to write while still getting better results than the Easy Java calculator.

> On the other hand, it required me to learn a new programming language, and one that didn't (and still doesn't) have the best support in IDEs.

Reviewer 2: Can we maybe remove this negative sentence? Or make this point in a positive way, by pointing out in the next paragraph that CS is just java (or kotlin), so has excellent IDE support (code highlighting, code completion, debugging)? 

I have an old blog with some screenshots that point that out: https://www.optaplanner.org/blog/2020/04/07/ConstraintStreams.html

Since its introduction in 2020, we kept improving it until it reached a full feature set in 2021 and has become the new default.
Now, a further full year later, we are finally ready to announce the deprecation of score DRL.

== What does it mean?

Starting with OptaPlanner 8.23.0.Final, users of score DRL will be getting IDE and logging notifications that score DRL is deprecated, encouraging migration to Constraint Streams.
Rest assured that support for score DRL will not be removed in OptaPlanner 8.
The next major version of OptaPlanner, however, will no longer support score DRL.

== How to migrate?

We understand that constraints are a fundamental part of your application, and that refactoring them to Constraint Streams will take time.
To make this job as easy as possible, we have prepared a https://www.optaplanner.org/learn/drl-to-constraint-streams-migration.html[migration guide] which explains the most typical use cases and migration patterns.

We believe that, while reading the guide, you will realize that the migration is fairly straight-forward in most cases.

> In return, you will get fast constraints written in Java that is ready for Quarkus and the cloud, with full IDE support and a https://www.optaplanner.org/docs/optaplanner/latest/constraint-streams/constraint-streams.html#constraintStreamsTesting[comprehensive testing framework].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In return, you will get fast constraints written in Java that are ready for Quarkus and the cloud, with full IDE support and a https://www.optaplanner.org/docs/optaplanner/latest/constraint-streams/constraint-streams.html#constraintStreamsTesting[comprehensive testing framework].
```
